---
title: Localizing Rails
layout: post
permalink: /articles/2008/08/10/localizing-rails
year: 2008
---

After releasing the "localized_dates plugin":http://www.railway.at/articles/2008/08/07/localized-dates-plugin, I thought that it's about time that someone wrote a comprehensive tutorial on how to fully leverage the power of the current "Rails i18n implementation":http://rails-i18n.org/.

Granted, Trevor Turk wrote a pretty cool "tutorial that shows simple localization in Rails":http://almosteffortless.com/2008/07/21/simple-localization-in-rails-22/, but it's missing details on how number formats, dates, etc. can be localized. This is where my tutorial starts.

For a change, I decided not to write a long article about it. Instead, I created a demo app that uses the i18n features (plus my localized_dates plugin) *and* has all the tutorial texts in the app itself. We'll see if this kind of tutorial works - if so, I'll probably continue working this way in the future.

Here's what you do:

<pre>
$ git clone git://github.com/clemens/i18n_demo_app.git
$ cd i18n_demo_app
$ ./script/server
</pre>

Then fire up your browser and go to localhost:3000 - the index page should be loaded automatically.

For now, this tutorial app includes info on how to localize:
* Date and Time Formats
* DateHelper (forms)
* NumberHelper
* ActiveRecordHelper (incomplete)

Feedback, as usual, is appreciated!

h3. Translations/Forks

"Fabio Akita":http://www.akitaonrails.com/ has forked the demo app on GitHub and translated it to Portuguese. If you want to translate it to other languages, that's perfectly fine by me! Leave me a note in the comments and I'll add your translation to the list.

Translations:
* Australian English by "Dr Nic Williams":http://drnicwilliams.com
* Portuguese (Brazilian) by "Fabio Akita":http://www.akitaonrails.com
* Spanish (Argentinean) by "Leandro Marcucci":http://leanucci.com.ar
* Japanese and content translation by "Masayuki Nakamura and Simon Tokumine":http://www.japancentre.com
* Thai by "Prem Sichanugrist":http://sikachu.com