---
title: Facebook Trouble (And What We Can Do About It)
layout: post
year: 2010
published: true
---

I’ve been registered at Facebook since my semester abroad in Australia
in 2007 – mainly to keep in touch with a few people I’ve met there.
Truth is, I’m not much of a user and I never was. I post the occasional
status/mood message, comment on some people’s messages/photos and there
are probably \~ 20 photos of me online (that I know of). I’m a member of
probably a dozen groups/fan pages and there’s no information on my
profile that I wouldn’t tell a stranger on the street – I don’t think,
knowing who my girlfriend is or my date of birth is an intrusion in
terms of privacy. And I don’t play Farmville, MafiaWars and whatnot, and
have set pretty much all my privacy settings to “Only my friends”.

Still, I’m having trouble accepting Facebook’s latest changes in terms
of privacy (btw. there’s a cool visualization of [what has changed in
Facebook’s default privacy settings since
2005](http://mattmckeon.com/facebook-privacy/)). This whole connecting
your profile to websites is just scary. Not so much because of myself
but because of other people – people not having the right sensitivity
regarding online privacy and/or who – due to their lack of technical
skills – can’t navigate through Facebook’s privacy settings or properly
understand them.

### Calls for an Open Alternative

Some people are calling for a change – for example, [Wired magazine
posted an article calling for an open alternative to
Facebook](http://www.wired.com/epicenter/2010/05/facebook-rogue/) a
couple of days ago and it seems that some people have already been
working on fairly interesting stuff. There’s a distributed social
network named [Diaspora](http://www.joindiaspora.com), for example,
which looks promising and there’s also
[OneSocialWeb](http://onesocialweb.org/) – both featured in [another
article on Wired
magazine](http://www.wired.com/epicenter/2010/05/facebook-open-alternative/).

Do I think these projects (and there are certainly others in the makes
as well) are interesting? Hell yeah. Do I think they’ll be able to
become serious competitors for Facebook? Not really. Reasoning? There’s
two things that will stand in the way: people’s ignorance regarding
privacy and general problems about Facebook, and people’s adamant cry
for activities offering instant gratification.

### Facebook Doesn’t Have a Lot of Features

Under the covers, [Facebook really doesn’t offer a
lot](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Facebook_features): I’d guess the core
features could be implemented in a few weeks even with a small (but
capable) development team. Even scaling shouldn’t be that much of a
problem before reaching a certain (big) amount of users.

The real USP lies in the [Facebook
platform](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Facebook_Platform), providing a
possibility for companies to offer Facebook users their (mini)
applications. There are lots of games and more or less funny tools,
offering users a little distraction from their work/studying/whatever.

Facebook’s core features actually have become a by-product of its
application platform: People would use the apps without the Wall, Poking
or Photo Albums, but most likely not vice-versa. Looking at current
[Facebook statistics](http://www.facebook.com/press/info.php?statistics)
– though they may be forged – may confirm this: Apparently, 70% of all
Facebook users engage with the platform regularly in some way.

### As Long as People Like to be Insulted by Dr. Cox, (Open) Competitors Don’t Have a Stinkin’ Chance

It all boils down to a simple equation: People like instant
gratification through applications offered through Facebook by
companies. Companies are creating Facebook apps to get a hold of
people’s personal data. Thus: If a platform doesn’t offer people’s
personal data, companies won’t write applications for it and people
won’t use it because there aren’t any apps.

So as long as people like to be insulted by Dr. Cox (of Scrubs) on a
daily basis, be offered free advice by the Wise Nut, nourish their crops
in FarmVille or rob their friends in MafiaWars, social networks wanting
to compete with Facebook will have to offer something similar to their
users. Since companies don’t develop free applications for shits and
giggles, I don’t see that happening anytime soon.

### So What Can We Do?

As I’ve outlined, I fear that Facebook not only is here to stay but also
that competitors don’t really have a chance to attract a relevant market
share any time soon. And I don’t see global online laws being
established anytime soon – so Mark Zuckerberg and others will be able to
continue executing their criminal plans (yes, I think some of the things
Facebook does are criminal!). So all we can do for the time being is
damage limitation and try avoiding collateral damage.

I think, our duty as tech-savvy people is to inform and maybe educate
our less tech-savvy friends and family about online privacy in general
and Facebook’s privacy issues in particular. We can tell them to take
down all profile information that isn’t absolutely necessary and not
join stupid groups or fan pages anymore. We can inform them about
alternatives – why not put pictures on [Flickr](http://flickr.com),
travels on [Dopplr](http://dopplr.com) or [TripIt](http://tripit.com)
etc.? We can take a look at emerging projects like Diaspora and
OneSocialWeb, and in due time try convincing people to switch – even
though there might not be FarmVille, MafiaWars or Which Vegetable Are
You (I was broccoli, btw.).

And we can hope for Mark Zuckerberg taking it a notch too far, resulting
in either conviction (he’d certainly deserve it) or huge amounts of
people leaving Facebook for good (he’d deserve that even more).

**UPDATE**: Don’t forget to uncheck the checkbox at
http://www.facebook.com/settings/?tab=privacy&section=applications&field=instant_personalization
so at least Facebook’s partners don’t get access to your information as
soon as you just **visit** their website coming from Facebook.
