---
layout: post
title: Improve Your Work Environment
year: 2012
---

### TL;DR

Good equipment provides increased productivity, motivation and health
for a comparatively low fixed investment every year or two. If you’re a
freelancer, get better equipment right now – if you’re an employee, talk
to your boss and reason with them in terms of how much more money you
could make them or how much money they can save by providing you with
better equipment. And for your next career move: Check out your future
work environment before you sign the contract: If the development team
is seated in dark basement rooms in front of a 15 inch CRT, chances are
you don’t want to work for that particular company – no matter how great
it all sounds on paper.

### Background

I read a chapter titled “Invest in a Good Environment” in [The
Developer’s Code](http://pragprog.com/book/kcdc/the-developer-s-code)
(it’s awesome, buy it!) today which got me thinking about this topic.

As a freelancer, I get to see lots of people work and, obviously, I get
to see lots of work environments – some good, some not so much. I can’t,
for the life of me, figure out how one can possibly justify not to
create a work environment for their programmers that is perfect (or at
least tolerable).

### The Usual Suspects

Let’s start with the workhorse itself: the **computer**. I’ve seen (and
been told about) talented people hacking away on their outdated,
underpowered Dell/IBM/You Name It laptops or desktops. You know, single
core processors, 1-2 GBs of RAM etc. Booting takes ages. So does
compiling or – in the case of Rails – starting the server, running the
tests etc. You can get [16 GB of RAM for less than $100
today](http://www.amazon.com/s/ref=nb_sb_noss?url=search-alias%3Daps&field-keywords=16+gb+ram&x=0&y=0)
or a new decent system for a couple hundred more.

Next: **Screens**. Big-ass screens are fucking cheap these days. No, I’m
serious: If you’re not doing design work where you need 100% authentic
colors at all viewing angels, a good-quality TN+ display will be just
fine. You can get a 27 inch screen starting at just below $300 (I
recently [bought one myself](http://www.amazon.com/dp/B0043T34RK)).
Smaller displays aren’t that much cheaper – so why would you buy them?

Also: **Keyboards**. If you’re programming, chances are you spend a good
deal of your work day typing. A decent keyboard is an absolute must. I
prefer wireless keyboards because I can move them around without
knocking things over or worrying about cord length. If you easily get
sore wrists or shoulder pains, get a real ergonomic keyboard – I hear
[Kinesis](http://www.kinesis-ergo.com/) make great ones.

**Desks**. You should have a big desk. Not so much for filling it up
with piles of chunk or that big ass screen I’ve mentioned. It’s more
about having enough space that you can, if you want or need to, look
something up in a book, start scribbling or pair program right away
without having to push things aside first. Big desks are easier to keep
in a usable, clean(ish) state.

Last but not least: **Chairs**. You sit all day long. And if you’re like
me, you’re not taking nearly enough breaks and you’re getting not nearly
enough exercise. You owe it to your body to at least rest comfortably
during those long hours you work.

### Why You (and/or Your Boss) Should Care

Why am I saying all this? **If you’re a freelancer, you should just
spend some money on decent equipment and if you’re employed you should
get your company to do so.**

Why? Well, equipment costs are usually low fixed costs, especially
compared to what they have to pay you for your work. If a company pays
that extra $100 for a bigger/better screen, **your increased
productivity (and probably motivation) will make up for that in a few
weeks or even days**.

Decent computers reduce wait time – that is, time you spend waiting for
those tests to run, that page to re-render, this debugging tool to start
up. If your test suite runs in 5 rather than 10 minutes, chances are
you’ll save **a few hours per week**. That’s more than **a hundred hours
per year**. Take your hourly rate or salary and multiply that by 100 –
that’s how much money you’re not making (if you’re a freelancer) or that
you cost your company extra without being productive (if you’re
employed). If that money argument isn’t good enough, I don’t know what
is.

Big screens are good for viewing things side by side or on top of each
other. Think about it: How often do you look at a stack trace, figure
out that the error is on line 102, switch to your editor and then switch
back just to double check that it *really* is on line 102? Or you’re not
100% focused and forget the line number while switching. With a big
screen, you can just go left/right or up/down – no context switch, no
remembering/forgetting things – everything’s just there. Or if you’re
doing HTML: Seeing the code and the result side by side can be a huge
time saver. If you can handle it, two or three displays can be
beneficial as well – me, I find multiple displays irritating and prefer
one big screen instead.

Keyboards are so damn cheap that it feels hideous to even mention them.
Programmers aren’t two-finger-typing phone operators – we touch-type up
to several 100 keys per minute. Why would one want to be slowed down by
something that costs less than an average dinner for two or – let’s face
it – that stupid phone you have on your desk but never use anyway? The
same goes for desks, actually.

And the chairs: Sure, [good office
chairs](http://www.haginc.com/products/hag-capisco/) can be a lot more
expensive than the above-mentioned screens. But what’s more expensive:
Getting decent chairs or losing part of your workforce in their thirties
or forties because they have to undergo multiple weeks of physical
therapy?

General side note for all of the above: Companies not permitting their
employees to bring their own (better) equipment because of some
compliance concerns and other business pseudo-bullshit are just about as
ridiculous – maybe even more.

**Invest in your own health, motivation and productivity and/or make
your company do so. It will pay off for everyone.**
